Doc on structuring scripts (#337)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: docs/contributing-to-analyses/analysis-modules/script-structure.md

# Structuring analysis scripts

While [notebooks](notebook-structure.md) are a great way to write analyses meant for interactive viewing and sharing, you may instead choose to use scripts (`*.R` or `*.py` for R and Python, respectively) to handle the "heavier lifting" aspects of your analysis.
Scripts are always a great place to add code or functions you tend to use frequently.

This page covers our recommendations for how you can structure your analysis scripts, which can store in the [`scripts` folder of your analysis module](./index.md#skeleton-analysis-module-contents).

To learn more about writing a wrapper script to run all scripts and/or notebooks in a module, please refer to [this documentation on running analysis modules](running-a-module.md).

Similar to our [recommendations for computational notebooks](notebook-structure.md), we recommend using a similar overall structure in your scripts to enhance sharing and reproducibility:

> <!-- Do we want to recommend a shebang? -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- **[Shebang](https://linuxhandbook.com/shebang/):** Add an opening line to set the script's interpreter.
- **Opening comments**: Add comments to the top of your script that briefly explain the script.
- **Load packages**: Load required packages.

> - **Functions**: Define any custom functions used in the script.

Reviewer: I don't know if we want this here or in the "considerations" section.
```suggestion
- **Functions**: Define any custom functions used in the script.
All functions should include documentation comments.
```

> - **Parse input arguments**: Parse input arguments, such as file paths, here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Parse script arguments**: Parse any arguments to the script, such as file paths, here.
```

- **Main body**: This is where the main body of your script should appear.

> - [Optional] **Session info**: Export out the versions of all packages used in the analysis.

Reviewer: Maybe?
```suggestion
- **Session info** (optional): Export out the versions of all packages used in the analysis.
```

Below, we provide a few additional considerations that are specific to scripts in general, and then specific considerations for R and Python.

### Considerations for any kind of script

- The first line of your R script should be a ["shebang,"](https://linuxhandbook.com/shebang/) which stands for "ha**sh** (`#`) **bang** (`!`)".
    - This makes the script executable by giving the exact path to the interpreter to use when running the script.
    - Below, we provide specific instructions for how to write this line in [R scripts](#r-shebang) and [Python scripts](#python-shebang).
- Your opening comments should be a brief, 1-3 sentences describing the purpose of the script.
    - These comments _are complementary to_ but do not replace [additional documentation in your module's `README.md`](documenting-analysis.md).
- If you need to import a separate script with reusable functions, you should import it in the section where you load other packages.

> - In most cases, your script should not hardcode input and output file paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In most cases, your script should not hard code input and output file paths.
```

Instead, we recommend using an argument parser to read these paths in from the command line.
    - Below, we provide recommendations for argument parsing in [R scripts](#r-arguments) and [Python scripts](#python-arguments).
 - You may still want to export session information at the end of your script.
See our additional documentation on how to do this for [R scripts](../determining-requirements/determining-software-requirements.md#in-a-script) and [Python scripts](../determining-requirements/determining-software-requirements.md#in-python-scripts).

### Considerations for R scripts

#### Shebang { #r-shebang }

Your R scripts should always start with this line:

```r
#!/usr/bin/env Rscript
```

#### Parse input arguments { #r-arguments }

> We recommend using the [`optparse` package](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/optparse/index.html) to parse input arguments in R scripts.

Reviewer: CRAN says to use these kinds of links
```suggestion
We recommend using the [`optparse` package](https://cran.r-project.org/package=optparse) to parse input arguments in R scripts.
```

For example, after loading the `optparse` package, you can define input options with the [`make_option()`](https://rdrr.io/cran/optparse/man/add_make_option.html) function, and then use the [`parse_args()`](https://rdrr.io/cran/optparse/man/parse_args.html) function to parse them into a usable list.

```r
# Set up arguments
option_list <- list(
  make_option(
    # Users can specify this argument with either `-i` or `--input_rds_file`
    opt_str = c("-i", "--input_rds_file"),

>     # The provided value will be stored as a character variable called `input_anndata_file`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # The provided value will be stored as a character variable called `input_rds_file`
```

    type = "character",
    dest = "input_rds_file",
    # Description of the argument
    help = "path to input RDS file for analysis"
  ),
  ##  define additional options here ##
)

# Parse arguments into a usable list

> opt_list <- parse_args(OptionParser(option_list = option_list))
> ```
> 
> In the above example, you can access the parsed argument as `opt_list$input_rds_file`.

Reviewer: I think being less verbose here is worth the cost, as `option_list` and `opt_list` are way too similar.
````suggestion
opts <- parse_args(OptionParser(option_list = option_list))
```

In the above example, you can access the parsed argument as `opts$input_rds_file`.
````

#### Additional R tips

- You can add more structure to your script using [sectioning comments](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/workflow-style#sectioning-comments), which help you navigate the code in RStudio much like section headers in a notebook.

### Considerations for Python scripts

#### Shebang { #python-shebang }

Your Python scripts should always start with this line:

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

#### Parse input arguments { #python-arguments }

We recommend using the [`argparse` package](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html) to parse input arguments in Python scripts.

> For example, after loading the `argparse` package, you can define a parser object with [`argparse.ArgumentParser()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html#creating-a-parser), and then use [`.add_argument()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html#adding-arguments) to add each argument to the parser object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, after loading the `argparse` package, you can define a parser object with [`argparse.ArgumentParser()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html#creating-a-parser), and then use the [`.add_argument()` method](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html#adding-arguments) to add each argument to the parser object.
Finally, use the [`.parse_args()` method](https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html#argparse.ArgumentParser.parse_args) to create an object containing the argument values.
```

```python
# define a parser object with helpful information for script users
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(
    description = "Performs task XYZ as part of analysis"
)

> # parse a command line argument

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# define a command line argument
```

parser.add_argument(
    # Users can specify this argument with either `-i` or `--input_anndata_file`
    "-i",
    "--input_anndata_file",
    # The provided value will be stored as a string called `input_anndata_file`
    type = "character",
    dest = "input_adddata_file",
    # Description of the argument
    help = "path to input AnnData file for analysis"
)

> ```
> 
> In the above example, you can access the parsed argument as `parser.input_anndata_file`.

Reviewer: Missing a step here:
````suggestion
# define any additional arguments here

# parse the arguments into an object
args = parser.parse_args()
```

In the above example, you can access the parsed argument as `args.input_anndata_file`.
```

#### Additional Python tips

> - You may wish to enclose your opening comments inside a [triple-quote block](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/triple-quotes-in-python/).

Reviewer: I don't know that this is worth including? (Also, I am inordinately annoyed by the curly quotes in their syntax block) But I might include something about docstrings specifically: https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/ or https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-docstrings/

    # Description of the argument
    help = "path to input AnnData file for analysis"
)
## define any additional arguments here ##

# parse the arguments into an object
args = parser.parse_args()
```

In the above example, you can access the parsed argument as `args.input_anndata_file`.

#### Additional Python tips

> - Please use [docstrings](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-docstrings/) when adding documentation to any custom functions you write.

Reviewer: Make this a bit more direct? Or maybe something in between. I mostly don't want it to sound like documentation is optional.
```suggestion
- Include [docstrings](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-docstrings/) for all custom functions you write.
```
